[Music]
well this is part 3 of chapter 9 on
optimism from the beginning of infinity
now I'm recording this right during the
50th anniversary of the Apollo 11
landing on the moon
it was launched on July 16 today is July
17 if I don't get to the moon until July
20th so hopefully at least one of these
episodes will be out on or around July
20th I was just listening to the great
politician Daniel Hannan I often don't
preface any politicians name with great
but I think as far as living statesmen
go and Daniel Hannan is as good as we
have right now and he's a great defender
of freedom and optimism and he was just
speaking to Ben Shapiro I don't listen
to Ben Shapiro very often but Ben
Shapiro has an interview series and
during his most recent interview he
interviewed Daniel Hannan so it was a
great conversation and one thing one
thing that Hannon was talking about was
how American politicians really need to
cheer up Kennedy got to the moon and
helped inspire a generation of people to
come with him to come with him on the
intellectual journey that was
preparations for the moon because of
optimism now where is that optimism
today people seem to continually
complain about how bad the economy is
though it's better than ever how bad the
job rate is though more people are
employed than ever by almost every
metric it doesn't matter what country
you're in things are getting better
unless you're in North Korea certainly
in America things are getting better in
Great Britain things are getting better
in Australia things are getting better
Canada things are getting better now
there are some places where things might
be getting a little worse but those are
places where they've enacted pessimistic
policies and so we just need optimism we
need we need to have a stance of more
freedom rather than less we need to
really be looking at the future and how
what the potential of people are and
what the potential of people is rather
than all the damn
that people are doing all the time and
so because we think that people are
inherently bad and causing all this
damage we tend to enact policies we tend
to cause society to move in waves which
slows down progress or which regards
people with suspicion in some way and
this is not good this is not good for
optimism so let me get into part three
so what we're talking about politicians
leaders statesmen let me return to the
section therefore in the beginning of
infinity chapter 9 the summarising
poppers political philosophy and in
particular his philosophy of democracy
so I might repeat a little bit of what I
said in the previous episode but I think
it's important because if we're going to
be led in any direction at the moment
the way in which society is organized it
is such that a whole bunch of resources
are controlled by a small group of
people in the form of governments and
many of these politicians many of these
leaders are pessimists so given that
circumstance and given that we will
always make errors in electing people
and those people might enact bad
policies what therefore should the
stance be with respect to what democracy
is well from the be well from the
beginning infinity let me read systems
of government are to be judged not for
their prophetic ability to choose and
install good leaders and policies but
for their ability to remove bad ones
that are already there
that entire stance is fallibilism in
action it assumes that rules and
policies are always going to be flawed
the problems are inevitable but it also
assumes and improving upon them as
possible
problems are soluble the ideal towards
which this is working is not that
nothing unexpected will go wrong but
that when it does it will be an
opportunity for further progress
now on this oldest policy this has meant
my own reflection on this on this topic
of fallibilism in our individual lives
the the magician Penn Jillette of Penn &
Teller Fame he's he's a famous
libertarian he's given some excellent
speeches over he is
what libertarianism is about and and
really for him and and for me and for I
think popper as well
it's about systems of government that
tend to move away from violence where
possible that tend to avoid coercion and
force and so what Penn Jillette talks
about is what would he use a gun for and
he says he'd use a gun to stop a murder
and he'd use a gun to stop rape he'd use
a gun to defend his country from violent
invasion but then he asks would I use a
gun to build a library and he has a
personal reflection in these speeches
about how important public libraries are
and how important they personally were
to him he says he learned more at his
Public Library than perhaps anywhere
else as a child growing up but he
wonders what would he do in order to
build a public library well he says that
he personally he would you would beg
people he would try and persuade them
he'd play hard and gather funds together
if he could he would maybe even bend the
truth a little in order to get those
donations he'd really really want
libraries to be built but he simply
wouldn't use a gun to do it in other
words he's optimistic that people would
be open to persuasion that the knowledge
he has about the possibility of
accomplishing projects without coercion
could be learned by others and they
would think like him eventually after
enough persuasion many see this as too
hard and ask it's it's it's rare to
encounter it's rare to encounter other
genuine libertarians like this or
genuine capitalists or genuine freedom
lovers people who are genuine optimists
in this sense especially about people so
they think that some coercion some force
some violence some amount of bringing
guns to the table is necessary in order
to do good Public Works because they
have this Thomas Hobbesian view about
people that people are just animals
barely controlled by the state and the
don't want to help each other I think
this is completely and utterly false we
do and we do want public libraries for
example but the alternative view is that
only only force in the form of the state
or in the form of government can do
things like build libraries or roads or
social welfare or any of a large list of
things that that people think that only
governments are able to do and that
private industry can never do those
people are pessimists about the
possibility of non-violence and what
reason and knowledge can accomplish I
think I've mentioned before neil
degrasse tyson the astrophysicists the
science communicator in america he
famously talked about how only NASA a
great lover of NASA but neil degrasse
tyson articulated what i think many
people thought which is that only NASA
could ever do space exploration only the
apparatus of a state with that amount of
money could ever hope to explore space
and so that's why we need to fund NASA
more and more this was just prior to
Elon Musk's setting up SpaceX and I
think it was a little bit after um
Richard Branson began Virgin Galactic
private industry is going into space it
would have been better had
NASA taken had NASA have been able to
accomplish what it did without coercion
it did so that that that's happened and
it continues to have but I suppose of
all the things that we're going to steal
money for the exploration of space is
better than some things ok this is a
spectrum of bad things to steal for but
some people think it can't be done some
people think that people are just bad or
that although they would give money in
order to explore space they would give
money in order to help out the poor or
they would give money in order to go to
library the overwhelming majority of
people wouldn't and so this is why we
need force and that in other words they
think people are not kind not good and
not generous
a personal anecdote um I don't like
these as a rule there they stink of
argument from Authority but some people
I admit aren't quite there yet simply
appreciating the validity of an argument
on its own merits but rather like when
someone defends freedom or criticizes
taxation or criticize the government and
then gets accused of being a privileged
rich person I've never been particularly
wealthy when one supports optimism not
just about the future but about people
one is accused of having rose-colored
glasses that one needs to get out of
their ivory tower or somesuch
and so I'll give you a little a taste of
my so-called ivory tower
and straight after high school I went to
university but throughout my entire time
at university I paid my own way I don't
paid my university fees by working as a
security guard and so my days were quite
long I'd start early in the morning
after lectures at university doing
physics and then straight after
university I'd go off to this very large
shopping center in a suburb called banks
town in the western part of Sydney and I
would and I would patrol I would patrol
the centre along with a large number of
other guards out at that shopping centre
I wasn't ever dealing with murderers it
never got quite that bad but the
shopping centre was and it remains to
this day one of the largest in Australia
in fact probably one of the largest in
the world and the area that it did it's
in wood banks town back then back in the
late 90s the early 2000s was a pretty
rough area on Thursday nights for
example in Australia there's a tradition
of Thursday night shopping I don't know
why but anyway on Thursday nights we'd
have anything up to 15 security guards
there's QD guard by the way as a mall
cop for an American we have up to 15 of
them patrolling the centre and for
various reasons I don't need to go into
the the the socio-economic issues right
now but there would be brawls at this
centre on Thursday you know mini riots
especially on Thursday nights there
would be shop stealers there would be
assault it was a very busy place for a
mall cop or a security guard to do work
there's there was something like 300
shops in the center some big some small
but there was a lot of action going on
quite often other times it was quiet but
my point is no one ever phoned our
security number just like no one ever
calls emergency services to say they
they have a wonderful person with them
that they'd like to report to you now
you're always being called to the most
terrible situations with nasty people
doing bad things and this was almost
every shift now full-time police
officers assigned I think I have a
reasonable idea is reasonable an idea as
anyone does of how bad people can be of
how bad things can get but the
conclusion I drew after this was a good
6 years of working in this particular
role dealing with these great spectrum
of people is that I don't really think
people are bad I think the reason people
act badly is because of bad idea is the
the things that they've learned and
those can be changed
so I nonetheless nonetheless my
encounters with the reality of certain
bad people leads many I think to develop
a certain kind of compassion and
understanding but a lack of optimism
about people on an individual level
always calls out for authoritarianism it
says that I'm one of the good people one
of the smart ones the others however
they're the ones that can't be trusted
they need to be controlled and that
impulse breeds violence so when it comes
to doing things the government does by
force I really do think and this again
this is some argument from personal
experience nevertheless I really do
think that the vast majority of people
when they have the means will indeed
help each other out in the way the
libertarians think and I agree with Penn
Jillette we don't need guns to build
libraries this is not an ivory tower
type rose-colored rose tinted glass view
of reality I know how bad people can be
but the overwhelming majority of people
are good people who like to live in a
kind of compassionate society and it
doesn't matter if they
is a small minority of people who were
bad okay so back to the book why would
anyone want to make the leaders and
policies that they themselves favor more
vulnerable for removal indeed let me
first ask why would anyone want to
replace bad leaders and policies at all
that question may seem absurd that but
perhaps it is absurd only from the
perspective of the civilization that
takes progress for granted if we did not
expect progress why should we expect the
new leader or policy chosen by whatever
method to be any better than the old on
the contrary we should then expect any
changes on average to do as much harm as
good and then the precautionary
principle advises better the devil you
know than the devil you don't there is a
closed loop of ideas here on the
assumption that knowledge is not going
to grow the precautionary principle is
true and on the assumption that the
precautionary principle is true we
cannot afford to allow knowledge to grow
unless the society is expecting its own
faction unless a society is expecting
its own future choices to be better than
its present ones it will strive to make
its present policies and institutions as
immutable as possible
therefore Papa's criterion cannot be met
by societies that expect their knowledge
to grow and to grow unpredictably and
further they are expecting that if it
did grow that it would help this
expectation is what I call optimism and
I can state it in its most general form
thus the principle of optimism all evils
are caused by insufficient knowledge
optimism is in the first instance a way
of explaining failure but prophesying
success it says that there is no
fundamental barrier no law of nature or
supernatural decree preventing progress
whenever we try to improve things and
fail is not because the spiteful or
unfathomably benevolent gods are
thwarted us or punishing us for trying
or because we have reached the limit on
the capacity of reason to make
improvements or because it is best that
we fail but always because we did not
know enough in time but optimism is also
a stance towards the future because
nearly all failures and only all
successes are yet to come
and so just to just a pause on that so
the principle of optimism here all evils
are due to insufficient knowledge so if
we pause and reflect on that for a
moment if you if you were to reject that
notion reject the idea that all evils
are due to insufficient knowledge then
you think some evil is not due to
insufficient knowledge and can't be
addressed
by addressing the lack of knowledge then
perhaps you think the evil can be
addressed in some other way something
other than knowledge creation something
other than persuasion in other words
force and coercion as for knowledge a
lack of it is due to a lack of
creativity now this is intimately tied
up therefore with people because people
are the things that create explanatory
knowledge so to reject the solution so
to reject the solution to evil as being
about creating knowledge is about
rejecting the capacity or ability of
people to do something about it using
creativity and so this rejection of the
potential of people this anti humanism
is at the heart of pessimism back to the
book optimism follows from the
explicable 'ti of the physical world so
I explained in chapter 3 if something is
permitted by the laws of physics then
the only thing that per and the only
thing that can prevent it from being
technologically possible is not knowing
how optimism also assumes that none of
the prohibitions imposed by the laws of
physics are necessarily evils so for
instance the lack of the impossible
knowledge of prophecy is not an
insuperable obstacle to progress nor
insoluble mathematical problems as I
explained in Chapter right as Paul say
that's an important point there's lots
of things well at the moment we don't
know many of them that there are but
there are provably unknowable things or
unprovable things we should say
unprovable things in mathematics and the
overwhelming majority of statements in
mathematics are unprovable very well
does this mean there is a limit on
there's a limit on progress because of
girls and complaints there not because
all those things that are unable to be
proved are inherently uninteresting as
well they don't actually help us to
solve any problems here in physical
reality so back to the book that means
that in the long run there are no
insuperable evils and in the short run
the only insuperable evils are parochial
ones there can be no such thing as a
disease for which it is impossible to
discover a cure other than certain types
of brain damage those that have
dissipated the knowledge that
constitutes the patient's personality
for a sick person is a physical object
and the task of transforming this object
into the same person in good health is
one that no law of physics rules out
hence there is a way of achieving such a
transformation that is to say a cure it
is only a matter of knowing how if we do
not for the moment know how to eliminate
a particular evil or we know in theory
but we do not yet have enough time or
resources ie wealth then even so it is
universally true that either the laws of
physics forbid eliminating it in given
time with the available resources or
there is a way of eliminating it in the
time and with those resources
okay just pause here as well um David
mentions the word universal there and
and indeed the the principle of optimist
optimism itself is a universal claim the
all evils are due to insufficient
knowledge not also this principle of
optimism is logically equivalent
problems are soluble because evil is
just a certain kind of problem a
solution a solution is knowledge put
into practice problems are inevitable
can also be interpreted as an optimistic
view of reality because problems are not
all about suffering and they're not all
evils the the suffering type problems
and the even type problems they're just
special cases of problems and general
problems can be interesting and fun and
indeed in the in the distant future we
will have solved suffering we will have
solved suffering long time in the future
sure but suffering is a certain kind of
pain and inability to
persistently solve the same problem over
and over again that might cause you
unhappiness that can cause you suffering
so problems can indeed be fun if
problems were not inevitable then we'd
have no problems and that as david says
elsewhere is another word for death the
unproblematic stank which paradoxically
would be a problem of course so
logically speaking there's no escape
from this problems are inevitable it's a
good thing that the world happens to be
this way but problems are inevitable is
also an appeal to recognize we cannot
prevent problems either the
precautionary principle is a terrible
idea
the idea of the precautionary principle
is that we should be careful with for
example technology careful we progress
careful with doing too much because we
might upset something and cause
destruction but doing nothing is
guaranteed to cause destruction we
cannot know about the problems we're yet
to encounter and the only guard against
them is to make rapid progress to create
lots more knowledge and lots more wealth
now that won't make the problems go away
or protect us from them in any sort of
perfect sense
it will just make us more able to solve
them when we do encounter them all evils
are due to lack of knowledge is a
universal claim so it says something
fundamental about reality about our
circumstance as a fundamental principle
that means it touches just about every
single facet of our lives at the heart
of the some of the worst purported
solutions to the big problems that we're
encountering right now and rather than
calling them bad solutions we might just
call them evasions the heart of all of
these is some kind of pessimism so for
example people who think that people who
don't like the particular leaders that
are in power right now they want to
fiddle with democracy in order to ensure
that such a leader can't be elected in
the future at some point well they want
to reduce democracy in some way that
would lead to a kind of totalitarianism
and appeal to an appeal for undemocratic
institutions where it's more and more
difficult to remove certain rule
all rules indeed pessimism about trade
and how we shouldn't have a global
market pessimism about people and how we
need to value the environment over
living sentient people pessimism about
children leading to us to want to
control them and to coerce them and have
compulsory schooling pessimism about
compassion and kindness meaning that we
need to enforce or meaning that we need
to steal from people because they won't
freely give away their money there's a
whole raft of terrible ideas all of
which at their heart at their root have
pessimism ISM motivating them in some
way pessimism typically about people
David then goes on to speak about how
death is just another problem you
everyone should be following the work of
all Buddha grey or Buddha gray who works
on life extension science and he would
hope to hope to cure death okay and he
regards there as being only a finite
number of different problems to solve in
order to cure death and David talks
about that here and I'll just read a
small section of what David has written
here where any rights sometimes
immortality in this sense is even
regarded as undesirable for instance
there are arguments from overpopulation
but those are examples of the Malthusian
prophetic fallacy what each individual
surviving person would need to survive a
present-day standards of living is
easily calculated what knowledge that
person would contribute to the solution
of the resulting problems is unknowable
there are also arguments about the stuff
occasionally caused by the entrenchment
of old people in positions of power but
the traditions of criticism in our
society are already well adapted to
solving that sort of problem even today
it is common in Western countries for
powerful politicians or business
executives to be removed from office
while still in good health now also on
this topic of immortality and curing
death Martin Rees very recently wrote an
article and I'll link to that article
about how we shouldn't hope for
immortality that it's kind of an immoral
thing it's
it's strange impulses david observed
that people would hope for their own
death even while trying to avoid it it's
a it's a strange philosophy now back to
the book and here is the parable of
optimism so it's a traditional
optimistic story that runs as follows a
hero is a prisoner who has been
sentenced to death by a tyrannical king
but gains reprieve by promising to teach
the king's favorite horse to talk within
a year that night I felt a prisoner asks
what possessed him to make such a
bargain a lot can happen in a year the
horse might tire the king might die I
might die well the horse might talk the
prisoner understands that while his
immediate problems have to do with
prison bars in the key in his horse
ultimately the evil he faces is caused
by insufficient knowledge that makes him
an optimist he knows that if progress is
to be made some of the opportunities and
some of the discoveries will be
inconceivable in advance progress cannot
take place at all unless someone is open
to him prepares for those inconceivable
possibilities the prisoner may or may
not discover a way of teaching the horse
to talk but he may discover something
else it may persuade the King to repeal
the law that he had broken he may learn
a convincing conjuring trick in which
the horse would seem to talk he may
escape he might think of an achievable
task that would please the king even
more than making the horse talk the list
is infinite even if every such
possibility is unlikely it takes only
one of them to be realized for the whole
problem to be solved but if our prisoner
is going to escape by creating a new
idea it cannot possibly know that idea
today and therefore he cannot let the
assumption that it will never exist
condition his planning optimism implies
all the other necessary conditions for
knowledge to grow and for knowledge
creating civilizations to last and hence
for the beginning of infinity we have as
popper put it a duty to be optimistic in
general and about civilization in
particular one can argue that saving a
civilization will be difficult that does
not mean there is a low probability of
solving the associated problems when we
say that a mathematical problem is hard
to solve we do not mean that it is
unlikely to be solved all sorts of
factors determine whether mathematicians
even address a problem and with what
effort
if an easy problem is not deemed to be
interesting or useful they might leave
it unsolved indefinitely while hard
problems are solved all the time usually
the hardness of a problem is one of the
very factors that cause it to be solved
thus President John F Kennedy said in
1962 and a celebrated example of an
optimistic approach to the unknown we
choose to go to the moon in this decade
and do the other things not because they
are easy but because they are hard
Kennedy did not mean that the moon
project being hard was unlikely to
succeed on the contrary he believed that
it would what he meant by hard task was
one that depends on facing the unknown
and the intuitive fact to which he was
appealing was that although such
hardness is always a negative factor
when choosing among means to pursue when
choosing among means to pursue an
objective when choosing the objective
itself it can be a positive one because
we want to engage with projects that
will involve creating new knowledge and
an optimist expects the creation of
knowledge to constitute progress
including its unforeseeable consequences
thus Kennedy remark that the moon
project would require a vehicle made of
new metal alloys some of which have not
been invented capable of standing heat
and stresses several times more than a
very experienced fitted together with a
precision better than the finest watch
carrying all the equipment needed for
propulsion guidance control
communications food and survival these
were the known problems which would
require as yet unknown knowledge that
this was on an untried mission to an
unknown celestial body referred to the
unknown problems that made the
probabilities and the outcomes
profoundly unknowable yet none of that
prevented rational people from forming
the expectation that the mission could
succeed this expectation was not a
judgment of probability until far into
the project no one could predict that
because it depended on solutions not yet
discovered the problems not yet known
when people were being persuaded to work
on the project and to vote for it and so
on they'll being persuaded that our
being confined to one planet was a naval
that exploring the universe was a good
and that the Earth's gravitational field
was not a barrier but merely a problem
and that overcoming it and all the other
problems involved in a project was only
a matter of knowing how and that the
nature of the problems made that moment
the right one to try and solve them
probabilities and prophecies were not
needed in that argument peasant
has been endemic in almost every society
throughout history it has taken the form
of the precautionary principle and of
who should real political philosophies
and all sorts of other demands for
prophecy and of despair in the power of
creativity and of the misinterpretation
of problems as insuperable barriers yet
there have always been a few individuals
who see obstacles as problems and see
problems are soluble and so very
occasionally there have been places and
moments when there was briefly an end to
present pessimism as far as I know no
historian has investigated the history
of optimism but my guess is that
whenever it has emerged in a
civilization has been a mini
enlightenment a tradition of criticism
resulting in an F the essence of many of
the patterns of human progress with
which we are familiar such as art
literature philosophy science technology
in the institutions of an open society
the end of pessimism is potentially a
beginning of infinity yet I also guess
that in every case with the single
tremendous exception so far a very
enlightenment this process was soon
brought to an end and the reign of
pessimism was restored now there is a
lengthy exposition of a of some of the
bright points where optimism has begun
in history and then unfortunately failed
so there was the mini enlightenment
during Athens and Athens had many great
philosophers many great thinkers made
lots of progress in politics and ethics
and so forth but eventually was overrun
by Sparta in a war and so so pessimism
ended up winning there and then there
was another short-lived enlightenment as
David refers to it in Florence in the in
the early Renaissance this was funded
and nurtured by the medicine Emily but
eventually a charismatic man jia lamas
Savonarola began to preach apocalyptic
sermons against humanism and medicines
and this great optimistic philosophy and
so the dogma of religion ended up
violently suppressing all of the all of
the excellent social and indeed economic
progress that had happened and so that
was the end of optimism there and
for a time although as david says that
that nascent spark of optimism what
fueled the fire of the of the true
enlightenment eventually they've also
been other mini enlightenment one
happened unions Islamic Golden Age from
nine sixty five to ten thirty nine so I
encourage everyone of course to go to
the book and to read the history of
optimism there if they're only budding
historians out there anyone wanting to
write an essay about the history of
optimism that would be a very
interesting as of yet largely uncharted
part of our knowledge of the way in
which societies can become stable over
time despite rapid change we don't know
the conditions about what it takes in
order for a society like ours to remain
peaceful coherent and yet able to
withstand rapid change so I'll just read
the last part of this chapter now the
inhabitants of Florence in 1494 or
Athens in 404 BC could be forgiven for
concluding that optimism isn't just
effectively that that optimism just
isn't factually true for they knew
nothing of such things as to reach of
explanations of the power of science or
of the laws of nature as we understand
them let alone the moral and
technological progress that was to
follow when the Enlightenment got
underway at the moment of defeat it must
have seemed at least plausible to the
formerly optimistic Athenians that the
Spartans might be right and to the
formerly optimistic Florentines that
Savonarola might be like every other
destruction of optimism whether in a
whole civilization or in a single
individual there must have been
unspeakable catastrophes for those that
are dared to expect progress but we
should feel more than sympathy for those
people we should take it personally for
if any of those earlier experiments and
optimism had succeeded our species would
be exploring the Stars by now and you
and I would be immortal so that's where
David ends our chapter what a powerful
way to end the chapter and so this is
why
many of us do get excited about people
who push pessimistic theories today we
take it personally as we should take the
failures of optimism in the past when
people talk about reducing progress
curbing freedoms then this is a
dangerous path we want immortality we
want to go to the stars we want people
to be free to pursue the solutions to
their own problems and this can only
happen in their condition of optimism
and freedom but unfortunately right now
our thought leaders I can't stand that
term but the thought leaders of the of
the West rather many of them from
politicians through to public
intellectuals are almost universally
pessimists they regret the progress that
people have made they regard the
activities of people with great
suspicion they care about inanimate
things more than they care about
creative people at least this is the
philosophy this pessimistic philosophy
underpinning the policies that they'd
like to impose upon society so let me
finish this epic three-part series on
chapter 9 optimism from the beginning of
infinity by going back to the beginning
when I started speaking not only about
Martin Rees but also our nick bostrom
because I think Nick Bostrom perhaps has
even more influence over many public
intellectuals globally than what Reese
has he is he does seem to be the
philosophers philosopher and this is he
is the the go-to person for example for
Sam Harris when it comes to any number
of different opinions and these pinions
the people think philosophy doesn't have
an impact but philosophy infiltrates
academia academia informs politics
politics reflects the media and then
inform the public so it's not like these
ideas in it I've retailer discussions
they filter down they filter down and
become the zeitgeist okay so I'll just
finish it's a fun fun little um thought
experiment I just want to see if we can
figure out what's wrong with it
bostrm promotes something called the
doomsday hypothesis now he didn't come
up with this but he promotes it so let's
read through the doomsday hypothesis
what the doomsday hypothesis is all
about and it's about how we should
expect we should expect that we will go
extinct sooner rather than later
it's a probability based argument it's a
Bayesian argument so let's see how it
goes so this is the way bostrm puts it
and you can find it Adam on his website
but I'll put the link up there as well
here we go
Bostrom's version of the doomsday
hypothesis step one
imagine a universe that consists of 100
cubicles in each cubicle there is one
person 90 of the cubicles are painted
blue on the outside and the other 10 are
painted red each person is asked to
guess whether she is in a blue or a red
cubicle or suppose you find yourself in
one of these cubicles what color would
you think it what color would you think
it is
well since 90% of people are in blue
cubicles and you don't have any other
relevant information at saints you could
you should think with 90% probability
you're in a blue cubicle so let's call
this idea that you should reason as if
you were a Rick that you should reason
as if you were a random sample from the
set of all observers the self sampling
assumption okay suppose everyone accepts
the self sampling assumption and
everyone has to and everyone has to bet
on whether they are near a boot and
everyone has to bet on whether they are
in a blue or a red cubicle then 90% of
all persons will win their bets and 10%
will lose suppose on the other hand that
the self sampling assumption is rejected
and people think that one is not more
likely to be in a blue cubicle one is no
more likely to be in a blue or a red
cubicle so they bet by flipping a coin
then on average 50% of the people will
win and 50% of the people will lose the
rational thing to do seems to be to
accept the self sampling assumption at
in this case alright so yes in this case
ok the next step as Bachchan puts it is
this but to modify the thought
experiment bit I I should probably say
I'm not reading verbatim the way that
bostrm has put this bostrm has an
idiosyncratic way of writing that it's a
bit jarring to me and so I'm just
putting it into my own words more or
less ok so Boston goes under so now
we're modifying this thought experiment
we still have a hundred cubicles but
this time they're not painted blue or
red instead they're numbered from 1
through to 100 the numbers are painted
on the outside then a fair coin is
tossed okay by God let's say if the coin
falls heads one person is created in
each cubicle if the coin falls tails
then the persons are only created in
cubicles one through ten okay so that
this finite number of cubicles one to
one hundred god flips a coin if it's
heads then there's one person that fills
in each cubicle from 1 to 100
but it falls tails then only cubicles 1
through 10 are filled with people
okay now you happen to find yourself in
one of the cubicles and you're asked to
guess whether there are 10 or 100 people
well at the moment we can't tell ok it's
random we're running inside of the
cubicle now the key is before you open
the door because you're going to be
allowed to open the door in a manner
that it's kind of as 50/50 it's kind of
a 50/50 whether or not there's been 10
people created by God or a hundred
people created by God we don't know okay
and then then we get into the Bayesian
stuff here so let's say you let's say
you want to apply Bayesian statistics to
this then what you can do is you can say
well conditional on heads having been
tossed let's say you find out that heads
have been tossed then the probability of
your cubicle but being between number
one and number ten is going to be one in
ten okay because there's actually 100
cubicles however if the coin was tossed
and it fell tails then tails was the
condition under which only one through
two ten was filled and if one through
two ten was filled then the probability
that you're in one to ten is identically
one okay
now next step suppose you open the door
and discover your own cubicle number
seven and again you're asked how did the
coin fall well the thing is here now we
now use both in statistics now we have
additional information we can now look
at all the doors okay there are is one
through to a hundred but you're in
number seven so what is the chance that
when God flipped the coin it was such
that only one through the ten was filled
rather than 1 through 100 well in fact
the probability is much higher that it's
1 through to 10 than what you might
otherwise think it's no longer 50/50
it's certainly not 5050 as bostrm says
the probability is greater than 50% that
at fill tails from what you are
observing is given a higher probability
on that hypothesis than the hypothesis
that it fell heads the precise near
probability of tails can be calculated
using Bayes theorem it is approximately
91% so after finding that you are in
cubicle number 7 you should think with
91% probability that there are only 10
people very well step 3
the last step is to transpose these
results to our actual situation here on
earth well is it is are we going to be
able to use that thought experiment what
we've just thought about there this
completely abstract idea where people
thinking and doing stuff cannot possibly
change the probabilities are we going to
be able to apply it to our situation on
earth okay so here's the see if you can
spot the error kind of thing let's
formulate the following two rival
hypotheses do Murli as he calls it doom
earliest that humankind goes extinct in
the next century and the total number of
humans will have that will have existed
is say 200 billion or another hypothesis
doom light do life is the idea that
humankind survives the next century and
goes on to colonize the galaxy the total
number of humans is say 200 trillion so
notice there he's capped the number of
humans at 200 trillion why why he's just
picked an arbitrary number out of thin
air okay he could pick anything
importantly he could pick him
what if he had a picked infinity well he
doesn't do that as an important reason
why he doesn't do that because it
doesn't suit his purpose but let's
continue to simplify the exposition we
will consider only these hypotheses
using a more fine-grained partition of a
hypothesis space doesn't change the
principle that would give more exact
numerical values do early correspond to
there being only 10 people in the
thought experiment of step to do light
corresponds to there being 100 people
correspondingly corresponding to the
numbers on the cubicles we now have the
birth ranks of human beings their
positions in the human race
corresponding to the prior probability
50% of the coin falling heads or tails
for now some probability of doom soon or
doing light this will be based on our
ordinary empirical estimates of the
potential threats to human survival okay
so the whole point here is that we know
that we are very early on in human
evolution humans have only been around
for what a million years something like
that okay Homo sapiens it might be a bit
more than that I think I saw a number
recently the might have doubled that not
sure anyway
it's early on in our evolution there has
been only about 200 billion people as of
the end of let's say this century
something like that presumably there's
going to be up to 200 trillion more
bostrm says the fact that we know were
early on in the history of humanity
means that were kind of like the people
that were in the cubicles labeled one to
ten we should expect that knowing that
we are in you know the we are early on
that we are well within that one through
to ten period or the one up to our 200
billion people we should not expect to
be in the 200 trillion that the number
of people is 200 trillion it's more like
200 billion on this hypothesis or what's
wrong with this well it casts people
once again as inner victims nothing they
can choose to do can change
the probabilities on this view that is
simply forced it ignores what people are
this is at the heart the problem with so
many of Bostrom's apocalyptic fears he
calculates always with higher
probability how people will come to an
end by ignoring anything people might do
to stop it
he downplays if not completely ignores
creativity well he does try to account
for creativity such as in his urn with
the black balls there's nothing anyone
can do about the black ball no knowledge
nothing pulling from his urn after the
black ball can possibly do anything
about the black ball nothing can be done
if you are one of the first 200 billion
people to prevent the end of humanity
why we also capping the maximum number
of people at 200 trillion we don't know
why doesn't it go on forever how do you
know that doesn't go on forever why are
we like a fixed number of people in
cubicles why is that our situation how
are these two things analogous to one
other can we use probability on infinite
sets if there's a nymph if there's
literally an infinite amount of time
before us so bostrom likes the black
ball idea the idea that there is an easy
soluble problem in other words a
physical impossibility because we know
problems are soluble now to make his
position as strong as possible he
doesn't quite think that there are
insoluble problems but he might think
that the solution might not come in time
that's fine but of course I return full
circle to my original criticism of
bottoms overarching philosophy which
that he's a philosophical pessimist he
always falls back on this I do
frequently falls back on this idea that
we just won't solve the problem in time
and that's pessimism yes fine but the
way we can almost guarantee of not
solving the problem in time is to enact
the exact solution that he wants which
is to slow down progress or to fire if
we fail to make progress as fast as
possible then yes we're more likely to
guarantee our inability to solve
problems optimists don't argue for
slowing down progress it's the
pessimists type bostrm that do and it
could very well be a self-fulfilling
prophecy if they succeed
bostrm and race and others are saying
some forms of progress are dangerous
that we should slow down and if we slow
down but if we slow down if we good
people slow down then this doesn't
necessarily slow down the bad people the
bad people that are trying to use
technology for evil
and if we're convinced that we should
slow down and we do slow down then the
evil people get the destructive
technology before we find a solution to
it in other words the pessimists end up
proving themselves correct but none of
them are left to verify that they were
correct that's the problem so that is
the doomsday scenario we should want to
avoid it and to do that we need to make
faster progress and we need to create
the conditions under which we can make
that faster progress and that requires
far more optimism thanks for bearing
with me for all there are many hours for
chapter 9 optimism eventually I'll get
to chapter 10 thanks for listening bye
bye